---
published: true
layout: post
category: Feature
author: Terry Glavin
tags: []
"toc-img": "http://lorempixel.com/150/150/nature/3"
---

**Voices from the Skeena Country**

_I. The Mountain Goats Invite the People to a Feast_

You can tell you’ve been closing in on the epicenter of Dimlahamid by the gradual ubiquity of hemlock and cedar along the main Yellowhead Highway as it unfurls westward through British Columbia, and by the snowy peaks of the looming mountains and the fireweed on the hillsides. You will swear you can smell the scent of salt air even though you’ve still got another three and a half hours to go before you’re at the coast. Everything is immediately and strangely discernible. You’re suddenly in the very middle of something very old and quiet, and at the edge of something very big and loud.

The roar of Hagwilget Canyon tells you that you are leaving the vast ranges of the Athapaskan language families, which reach all the way back to Hudson Bay, with linguistic cousins down among the Navajo and the Apache. These are the mountains and valleys of the people who call themselves Gitxsan, and they speak Gitxanimaax, which is the furthest upriver extent of several Tsimshian-related languages in a saltwater complex of tongues arising from Northern California and reaching all the way to Southeast Alaska. This is also where the old Roman Catholic influences of the continent begin to most noticeably bleed away into the Protestant missionary dominance of the coast that lies ahead. The Bulkley River boils through the canyon below you, emptying itself into the Skeena River just downstream, and up in the clouds above you is Mount Roche de Boule, which is Stegyawden.

By the time you’ve reached the little constellation of communities the locals today call the Hazeltons—New Hazelton, South Hazelton, Two Mile, Gitanmaax, Hagwilget, Old Town—everything gets impossibly jumbled and ragged. But this is also where everything starts to make perfect sense. This is where Dimlahamid was. They say it was like a vast city, a place that covered so much ground that a flock of geese could not traverse it without falling from the sky. Dimlahamid is where the world ends. Dimlahamid is where the world renews itself all over again. 
Dimlahamid is where the story begins. 

Up there in the peaks of Stegyawden, who knows how long ago, mountain goats once took the form of men. They invited the people of Dimlahamid to a great feast. It was a ruse to prepare for the avenging of an injustice that had been done to them by a group of young hunters years before. When everyone had settled down to the feast, a great one-horned goat appeared. The story ends with heaps of bodies at the foot of Stegyawden.

It’s a complicated story involving sacrilege and cruelty, but the thing to keep your eye on is that one young man was spared by the one-horned goat chief, and this man had been a boy when he’d spared the goat chief from slaughter years before. He’d marked the goat by rubbing its head in red ocher; that’s how he could tell it was the same goat. The moral of the story could be put this way: You do not want to mess with this place. 

Pull in at a New Hazelton truck stop, and you can hear it in people’s voices. It’s the same back in Smithers as it is down at Prince Rupert. Ask about the place. People will start talking about the mountains, the salmon, or the forests, and right away in their voices you will notice a kind of inflection, something along the spectrum running from reverence to pride to melancholy. It’s not what you would call environmentalism. It’s gone beyond that now. Among the far-flung descendants of the people of Dimlahamid, so it is too now among the people who have only lately come to call the Skeena Country their home. White people are very much a part of it now. They’re not just umshewa, driftwood, anymore.

Everyone is connected. Everything is connected. Even if you add in the people of the Nass Valley to the north and the Kitimat Valley to the southwest and all the islands within a day’s sail of the Skeena estuary, there are still fewer than 100,000 people in the Skeena Country. Most people are clustered around the Hazeltons, Smithers, Terrace, and Prince Rupert.

More than anything else, the salmon connect everyone to one another as well as to the water and the land. The Skeena River is one of the most productive salmon watersheds in the world. After the Fraser Basin, it’s the second largest watershed in British Columbia. More than three hundred distinct spawning populations of all five species of salmon and steelhead breathe life into the Skeena’s eleven major tributary rivers, supporting a human economy worth more than $100 million annually in tribal, commercial, and recreational fisheries. The salmon form the currency among and between myriad species in the Skeena Country’s four main mountain ranges and seven distinct biogeoclimatic zones, from the upland boreal interior to the salt marshes of the coastal temperate rainforest. The salmon swim among and between everything, connecting the mountains to the sea and the future to the past. 

Words like ecosystem might get you partway into understanding all this, but wilderness is where you’ll get lost. Every river confluence, every hillock, and every rock outcrop in the Skeena Country has its own story. 

Ancient forms of tenure and title radiate outward from Dimlahamid in every direction: rank, name, fishing station, goat-hunting mountain, hillside berry ground, crest. Hawilamax is The Place They Throw Away Turnips. Anwaris is Place of Digging. There is a place called Angudoon, which is the short form for a name that translates more fully as The Steep Place on the Riverbank Where a Man Is Pulled Up with the Right Hand of a Friend. Every cranny and back eddy is accounted for in the deepest antiquity by means of matrilineal clan systems of ownership and succession, all codified in what the Gitxsan call ada’ox, and what their Bulkley River neighbors among the Wet’suwet’en call kungax, and replicated in similarly distinct ways among the Kitselas, the Kitsumkalum, the Gitxaala, the Metlakatla, the Nisga’a, the Haisla, and all the way out to the Gitga’at of Hartley Bay. 

Each inch of ground is spoken for in intricate and often fiercely contested relationships among and between the people, the chiefs, and their clans. From as far into the northern interior as the eastern tributaries of Babine Lake, the crests of the house groups open a potlatch-box network of narrative trails, laws, obligations, and rights that spread like filaments in a web of family relations and ancient story-motif affinities, all the way to the outer coast. From the House of Many Eyes and the Birch Bark House around Moricetown, some event that may seem like a drizzle of rain if you’re just passing through will soon enough be noticed in tremors running through the Fireweed, Frog, Wolf, and Eagle clans, all the way out to the Killer Whale clan of Hartley Bay. Those people, way out there too, came from Dimlahamid. 

In the second decade of the twenty-first century, that peculiar inflection that you’d sometimes hear in the people’s voices was most acutely evident when the subject turned to the tumults overtaking the Skeena Country. You’d find yourself in conversations that required resorting to terms like ecological upheaval, catastrophic destruction, and malevolence. Almost overnight, industrialization projects worth $40 billion were either awaiting approval or were approved and permitted or well under way in the Skeena Country. At whatever stage, they were shaking the ground from the Upper Iskut to the Kitimat and from Old Kuldo to the Estevan Islands. Nobody could remember anything quite like it.

It was like something straight out of Dimlahamid. 

_II. The Return of the Medeek_

In the Gitxsan ada’ox, the Medeek is a great bear spirit that arises from the depths of Seeley Lake, which nowadays is only a pleasantly reed-choked fishing hole and campsite just off the Yellowhead Highway a few minutes west of New Hazelton. The saga of the Medeek takes some long while to tell properly. The bear spirit engages the chiefs of Dimlahamid in an epic battle, destroying everything in its path. There are earthquakes and avalanches. Mountainsides collapse. Forests are uprooted. Eventually, the monster is driven into the Skeena River. The creature’s malevolence makes its way back into the forest, and the creature itself is said to have returned to its lair at the bottom of Seeley Lake.

 The Medeek is also a phenomenon known to geologists and paleoecologists as a mysterious event that occurred some 3,500 years ago in the Hazelton Mountains. There was an ecological cataclysm of some kind—rivers changing their courses, massive debris torrents. There was terrible destruction. The one important difference between back then and the early years of the twenty-first century is that this time around, nobody quite knows how the story is going to end. Even from the narrowest economic analysis, nothing like this had happened in the Skeena Country since the Grand Trunk Pacific Railroad, the brainchild of the eccentric magnate Charles Melville Hays, connected Winnipeg to Prince Rupert in 1914. 
 
Just as the Atlantic replaced the Mediterranean as the main sea of commerce after the voyages of Christopher Columbus, so the Pacific replaced the Atlantic, by the twenty-first century, as the planet’s primary thoroughfare for trade and industrial expansion. With the phenomenal expansion of Asian economies, suddenly it was significant that the Port of Prince Rupert lay closer than other West Coast cities to key Asian ports, thirty-six hours closer to Shanghai than Vancouver and sixty-eight hours closer than Los Angeles. Prince Rupert connected to three continental railroad networks. Los Angeles connected to only two. 

When Canada’s newly minted Conservative government set out to transform the country into an “energy superpower” in 2006, it wasn’t just loose talk. Prime Minister Stephen Harper’s government intended to leverage northwestern BC’s Pacific advantage to feed China’s ravenous appetite for commodities. 

Oil would be the top—but by no means the only—commodity on the list. Canada’s crude oil reserves are estimated at 173 billion barrels, behind only Saudi Arabia and Venezuela in proven reserves. Almost all of Canada’s oil is locked up in bitumen, otherwise known as the tar sands. Canada’s National Energy Board reckoned bitumen production would triple over the first three decades of the twenty-first century. The Conservative government intended to exceed even those expectations. What this would require, by the spring of 2012, was the enactment of an unprecedented omnibus budget bill in the House of Commons that introduced, amended, or repealed nearly seventy federal laws, mostly related to environmental assessment and fisheries habitat protection, along with the abandonment of federal control on greenhouse gas emissions. 

What all that was largely intended to accommodate was a plan by the pipeline builder Enbridge Inc. to construct a $5.5 billion, 1,172-kilometer double pipeline punched straight through the heart of the Skeena Country from Bruderheim, Alberta, to awaiting supertankers at Kitimat. The largely Beijing-backed enterprise anticipated the crossing of perhaps 1,000 salmon rivers and creeks between the Rocky Mountains and the coast. It would mean 225 oil tankers every year, carrying unprocessed bitumen to refineries in California and China, traversing the tide currents and narrow passages of British Columbia’s fabled Great Bear Rainforest, and then out into some of the most treacherous seas on earth.

And that wasn’t even the half of it.

_III. The Country of the Red Goats_

The place the Skeena River begins is roughly 600 kilometers upstream from saltwater on the western edges of the Spatsizi Plateau. Other creeks and streams flowing off Klappan Mountain go on to form the two other great undammed rivers of British Columbia’s northwestern quarter, the Nass and the Stikine. The territory is most closely associated with the Tahltan people, although the word Spatsizi derives from the Sekani term for “red goat,” which comes from the area’s plentiful mountain goats and their purported ages-past custom of adorning themselves in red ocher. Otherwise known as iron oxide, red ocher is used in the painting of pictographs and certain heraldic poles. It’s said to be something no self-respecting Nisga’a or Gitxsan medicine person would ever have been without. It is the thing the marked the head of the one-horned goat that invited the people of Dimlahamid to that feast all those years ago. 

Because of its abundance of goats, grizzlies, moose, and wolves, and because it is home to the largest herd of Stone sheep in the world and the largest concentration of woodland caribou west of the Rocky Mountains, the region came to be called Canada’s Serengeti. Because it is where the Skeena, the Nass, and the Stikine arise, environmentalists call it the Sacred Headwaters. Because of all these things, an uproar greeted the news back in 2004 that Shell Canada Energy, a Royal Dutch Shell subsidiary, had moved into the territory. 

Before the local regional district was even aware of it, Shell was already barreling ahead with plans to sink hundreds of wells to tap into coal-bed methane over an area of 4,000 square kilometers of the Klappan Range. The wells would require hundreds of roads and pipelines. The whole project was based on the controversial method known as hydrological fracturing, or “fracking,” which usually involves the injection of toxic liquids to fracture deep coal seams to release the gas. 

The Tahltan started out divided against themselves about it. Then there were road blockades. Tahltan elders were arrested on the blockades. Legal challenges were fought all the way to the Supreme Court of Canada. It was a mess. It didn’t help Shell that company officials had no answers when anyone asked what the implications for the salmon might be. A wave of opposition arose—Friends of the Earth, the Natural Resources Defense Council, the Pembina Institute, the David Suzuki Foundation, the Sierra Club, and so on. 

Then Shell had the misfortune of finding that the Sacred Headwaters were especially sacred to Wade Davis, the world-famous National Geographic explorer-in-residence who had come to his vocation in those mountains. Among Shell’s fiercest adversaries was a coalition of the Skeena Country’s commercial, recreational, and aboriginal fishing organizations, almost all the First Nations of the area, the local guide-outfitters, the Skeena–Queen Charlotte Regional District, the Kitimat-Stikine Regional District, and the Village of Hazelton.

Even worse for Shell, as things turned out, there was Shannon McPhail, editor of the Kispiox Valley Community Newspaper, circulation: fifty. “A gossip rag,” McPhail calls it proudly. McPhail is a big-voiced, big-hearted, fourth-generation Kispiox Valley jane-of-all-trades with two small kids and a husband who works as a high-pressure welder, two weeks in, two weeks out, in the tar sands of Fort McMurray. She grew up one of four kids in a log house her parents built with trees they cut from their own homestead below Sedina Mountain, just a few kilometers south of the old family place at Telegraph Ranch on the Kispiox River. She was raised on mountain goat meat and wild sheep meat and moose meat, and she didn’t exactly “travel in the same circles” as environmentalists.

When McPhail first heard about Shell Energy moving into the headwaters back in 2004, she was twenty-nine, job hungry, and favorably disposed to whatever the company was up to. She had no time for the conservationists in Smithers and Terrace who were raising alarms about what coal-bed methane drilling might mean for the salmon. “I said, ‘You dirty, rotten, dope-sucking, tree-hugging hippies. This is another Chicken Little case of the sky is falling. Well, the sky has been falling, according to you guys, for the last hundred years, and lookit, it’s still up there.’ ” When McPhail first got “active” on the Shell file, it was “to actually shut up all the naysayers,” as she put it. She ended up as the executive director of the Hazelton-based Skeena Watershed Conservation Coalition, the fiercest frontline outfit fighting against Shell.

McPhail’s turnaround involved a sharp and painful learning curve. First, she learned that Shell hadn’t talked to any of the locals and wasn’t even offering the locals any jobs. The more she learned about the project, the harder it was to support it. The more questions she asked about it, the less she liked. Surely there would be a proper environmental assessment before Shell started drilling thousands of gas wells? No. Had anything like this been done before in a wild salmon environment? No. Where would the pipelines go? They didn’t know. Had there been any cumulative impact mapping? No. 
“I sat there, and my whole foundation, like, everything that my life had been built on, as far as thinking that everything was okay, just got shattered. Because I didn’t believe that corporations and governments would ever make such terrible decisions and that they always had people’s best interests at heart,” she says. 

The Regional District didn’t even know that Shell was already drilling test wells. The provincial Energy and Mines ministry was supposed to be overseeing everything, but the ministry had no answers either. The federal Fisheries and Oceans department insisted there was nothing to worry about—there weren’t even any salmon up there. But the Tahltan elders said there were. Ancient gaff hooks had been found up there.

 “I was totally naïve,” McPhail remembers. “I had no idea how conservation or environmental campaigns worked. But I knew that once the people of the community knew what I knew, they would not stand for this. Like, you know, once people got the information that I had, they’d be just as pissed as I was.” 
 
Soon McPhail’s group got involved in a joint project with the Tahltan elders. The main thing they set out to show was that there were indeed salmon up there in the red goat country. By the summer of 2006, they had their evidence: salmon scales collected, spawning fish photographed. Chinook, coho, and steelhead. “Nobody knows what happens in the upper Skeena, right?” McPhail laughs at the memory of that day. The salmon had beaten the odds and changed the nature of the game.

But it was a small victory; the Medeek had not been driven back into the depths of Seeley Lake. Not by a long shot.
