---
published: true
layout: post
category: Essay
author: Jim Norton
tags: ['story']
"toc-img": "http://lorempixel.com/150/150/nature/2"
"story-img": fishing.jpg
issue: Skeena
---


**Arrival**

Jim Norton 

It is possible to come home to a place you’ve never been. 

I did, on a typically rainy early September weekend in the company of Smithers resident and Ministry of Environment regional fisheries biologist Mark Beere. We hunched quietly along the banks of the upper Zymoetz, watched Gitxsan dipnetters at Moricetown, hopped across the shallows of the Kitwanga, paid homage to the Babine. We cast furtive glances at a pair of sockeye on their spawning bed, cheered a dozen finned torpedoes defying a pool’s meager outflow, and stood knee-deep in current amid thousands of migrants insistent on some upstream destination. 

Snapshots of my attention blended together like a flip-book story: tiny insects on a fish carcass, a porridge of flesh and scales on the earth, towering trees above the meadow, a community of animal tracks, clouds snagged on outcrops. The images were familiar— - things remembered, things learned. Everywhere, around me and within, there was a tangible seeping; there was uptake. 

My sense of arrival wasn’t rooted in any literal settling; I remain a visitor, based thousands of miles away, from a place where such natural abundance is preserved in historical portraiture. And it wasn’t just my fondness for the glorious tension intrinsic to autumn on a salmon stream, at once senescent and stirring. More than mere moments, more than their observation, it was a sense of deep reconciliation—of my attachment to the idea of a rich natural and cultural heritage with a life lived in the absence of the heritage itself. In the Skeena, I finally recognized my story.

Those first meanders along the river joined me to nine thousand years of people living along, working within, traveling through, drawing sustenance from, or somehow associating with the Skeena watershed, from Rupert to the Spatsizi, Telkwa to Kispiox. Today, our individual connections to this place are likely as different from each other as those of early settlements were to our modern communities. The pursuit of mere survival once bound people to a set of shared considerations for interacting with their environment; now, such unifying cultural contexts are less obvious, more variable. Conscious choices replace unconscious demands. We organize according to similar values and intentions, not common histories. Social structures continue to fragment and become more porous, with significant consequences for what we expect from the land and how we advocate for it. Yet, despite all this transformation, the river itself still sculpts our individual and collective experience within the watershed. Like those before us, we are here because it is here.

That it is here at all, that a watershed this size is still relatively intact at the start of the twenty-first century, is remarkable. That it remains biologically productive, persistently defying the northward progression of systemic collapses witnessed on the continent’s other great salmon-producing rivers, seems nothing short of miraculous. That such productivity continues to support the evolution of diverse ecological, economic, and cultural structures is practically an abstraction, especially to someone like me who knows such relationships only in the context of a lament for their passing and a nostalgia for their return. 

For most of the last twenty years, I have lived on rivers while working as a guide, migrating seasonally between North America and destinations overseas. I was comfortable being everywhere, belonging nowhere. I eventually moved to the inland edge of the Pacific Northwest, along the elevated vasculature of the Snake and Columbia River systems, an alpine womb that once produced as many Chinook salmon as anywhere on the planet. Only suggestions of its former wealth remained, but I adopted, sold, and interpreted the storied iconography of wildness, the picture-perfect scenery, the gin-clear water of Salmon Rivers and Redfish Lakes. The narratives were compelling, and people paid us well to deliver them. I was young, well insulated from the burdens of conflicting education or experience, and each day’s dawn seemed perfect from my bedroll on my boat. I would see the pictures, read the books, and hear the accounts of what it used to be, when the kings of the sea would return to their mountainous throne. I had a vague sense that something was missing, but it was hard to consider a more complete version of a landscape I knew as a form of ideal. It was hard to understand that such aesthetic integrity could double as a thin veneer. 

The richness of that past is an anecdote for much of my generation. Our timeline of memory begins just as that abundance was ending and, with it, the biological and cultural nourishment on which so much depended. My experience as a guide, and the connection I began making as a full-time resident, was as much a discovery of absence as a witness to plenty. At first there was no lens through which I could see my experience of working on rivers, facilitating what is now essentially a leisure pursuit, as a cultural remnant of once more robust and varied interactions with the land. I understood the concepts; I absorbed the importance of the fish to the biological integrity of watersheds and to the economic base of our rural communities. I got it, and I even got involved. I took the opportunity trips afforded to teach, to highlight the values that bind our experiences in these places. And I lobbied, I solicited, I proselytized, I rallied. On the river and off, I embraced the role of storyteller and the responsibility for helping to keep the river’s characters alive. But public engagement was my proxy for personal seeking, an attempt to resolve the paradox of identifying with a story that remains elusive and romantic yet was played out right here only moments ago. Though exotic, the story is, strangely, our own.


By now, the agents and effects of environmental degradation have become familiar to the point of cliché. In everything from beaver pelts to gold mines to trees to fish the cyclical booms of industrial extraction gave way to enduring busts. In particular, one hundred fifty years of overharvest and habitat destruction have made Pacific salmon as common to endangered-species listings as they once were in coastal streams. Less appreciated is the degree to which these impoverished populations have also been the focus of one hundred fifty years of dedicated efforts toward their conservation—arguably now the oldest, most complex, and most expensive life-support and recovery project in history. The search for any missing heritage might well begin with the legacy of how we destroy, but it must grow to include an understanding of how we have tried to save. 

By the time canneries appeared on the rivers of California, Oregon, and Washington in the late 1800s, the dramatic collapse of Atlantic fisheries had well established the vulnerability of seemingly limitless fish stocks. As mounds of surplus fish rotted on Northwest riverside docks, as industrial effluent polluted the water, as irrigation and railroads and hydraulic mines reshaped the rivers themselves, members of the public as well as politicians and corporate representatives expressed immediate and sincere concern for Pacific salmon populations. Early attempts at regulation included seasonal closures and gear restrictions, but the small scale and limited efficacy of the restrictions did not equal the capacity and efficiency of the expanding fleet. Within a few decades, production at every cannery on every river south of the Fraser had peaked and was in decline. 

There was nothing inherently wrong with a conservation strategy based on restricting access or type of technologies used. Assessments of aboriginal harvest suggest that their collective annual take on the Columbia, using diffuse systems of governance and various mechanisms for selecting species type, size, and number of fish captured, met or exceeded the peak of the commercial fishery. A more fundamental question is whether the concerns of non-aboriginal interests were ever about the salmon themselves as much as about the value they generated—and how the perception of that value informed our approach to conservation and influenced its outcomes. 

The transition from native to Euro-American fisheries, and from the corresponding gift-based society to a commercial one, involved more than a transfer of power from one economic structure to another or one culture to another; the salient transformation was from one value system to another. Instead of protecting salmon from being harvested unsustainably, the prevailing interest became protecting the harvest itself. Regulation and enforcement, with their implied limits, may have partly answered the question of how to make sure there are fish in the future, but they did not help answer the suddenly more pressing and relevant question of how to get the river to keep supplying a commodity for a growing global market. Included in the distinctions between feeding a family group, in perpetuity, and feeding the world, at a profit, are very different questions about what we wanted to save, for who, and how. Viewed in this context, it is easier to see that a century of regulatory failures were not just about the difficulty of establishing and implementing protections but with a more fundamental problem. Regulation and enforcement didn’t address our real concern about fish: how to get more of them.

One possible answer to the problem arrived in the United States from Europe, which having previously given us our cake now suggested we could eat it too. Experiments in fish propagation celebrated the potential for mass production of various species, including salmonids; the concept and methodology fit perfectly with an industrializing nation enthralled with its manifest destiny, the rise of its factories, the settlement of its frontiers, the triumph of its yeoman farmer. Fish culture was an opportunity to extend the conversion of wilderness to garden beyond the boundary of farm and forest, and estimates of limitless in-stream productivity reflected the euphoria with which it was greeted.

The timing of fish propagation’s arrival, so perfectly coinciding with the emerging crisis on North American rivers, was almost divine. No sooner had hatcheries offered a choice between the constraints of protection and the promise of production than they declared that choice false—we could have them both, protection _through_ production. Fish propagation not only promised to mitigate the effects of harvest and habitat destruction and hydropower, it also effectively endorsed them—providing both a response to and a justification for utilitarian transformations of western watersheds. There was no evidence that propagation would work, little apparent consideration what would happen if it didn’t, and it relied entirely on the presumption that extraordinary abundance existed in spite of nature’s variability, not because of it. Yet there was little hesitation. In response to evidence that careless development of river systems was killing the fish, well-intentioned people started removing the fish from the river; and salmon have literally been in our hands ever since. 

I arrived in the Pacific Northwest 150 years downstream of this confluence where compassion, ingenuity, and hubris converged with misunderstanding. In that time, the blueprint for our intervention has become the scaffolding of our failure—a monstrous suite of creative, sophisticated, and expensive alternatives to salmon swimming up- and downstream. We supplant traditional cycles of reproduction and death by raising them in concrete hatcheries, piping them from reservoirs behind dams, implanting them with tracking devices, transporting them in trucks, feeding them in offshore pens, protecting them from natural predation, harvesting them in labs, and compressing and scattering their dehydrated remains in forests and streams starved for their missing nutrients. Nine hundred miles from the ocean, six thousand feet in elevation, exhausted and battered and just short of their destination, Idaho’s celebrated sockeye are scooped from the upper Salmon River and trucked 140 miles to a multimillion-dollar warehouse in the desert. Their eggs are stripped, their milt is milked, and the next generation of icons begins its life in a redd of Ziploc bags, aerators, and PVC piping. In flourishing black marker, a whiteboard sign on the wall calls out from the virtual world: “Welcome Home, Sockeye!” 

Each step is designed to replace components of a life history structured by tens of millions of years of evolution in environments now converted to other uses. Paradoxically, the more effort devoted to creating an automated and simplified ecology, the more entombed we become in a suite of complex relationships requiring extraordinary commitments of resources. What looked like a fish turned out to be an energy system, and we find ourselves caught in the gears of our thingamajig—the salmon we produce are increasingly dependent on our assistance, and much of our assistance makes the system less and less hospitable to salmon. In the Columbia River Basin alone, we spend $1 billion a year to perpetuate the original myth of protection through production. In the real world, Columbia River salmon populations have declined more than 90 percent, over a dozen stocks are extinct or endangered, and realistic hopes for recovery remain elusive if not impossible. Even our metrics of progress now measure a salmon almost unrecognizable from what we set out to save. Ironically, the result is perfectly antithetical to the environmental dynamism salmon need to express their special genius, the life history diversity that propelled them to colonize and transform nearly every freshet and backwater from ocean bottoms to mountaintops. At incalculable cost, we constructed a reality out of our illusions, and have forgotten which is which.

For a growing number of people from outside the region, the Skeena is a chance to remember. For different reasons, arriving from points diffuse, people broadly classified as tourists might increasingly represent a de facto community of seekers, engaged in a form of pilgrimage. But finding something sacred is not the same as finding something inviolable. The protections so far afforded the Skeena by combination of its geographical isolation, biological resilience, and effective defense by advocates are temporary and incomplete. 

Already, pollution, intensive extraction by the logging, commercial fishing, and mining industries, and the development of rail lines and roads have left their mark on the ecology of the watershed. In turn, these changes continue to manifest as disruptions to the incumbent socioeconomic order. Reduced salmon returns have heightened tensions between stakeholders concerned about fish and access to their harvest. Consolidation of that access, to an increasingly commoditized resource, has concentrated economic and political power. Patterns from other rivers foreshadow familiar trends—toward a gradual transfer of accountability for management from specific individuals within the community to the more ambiguous framework of government and its proxy agencies, and the parallel transfer of the voices of protest to large coalitions of advocacy organizations. From my outsider’s perspective, which immediately recognizes the extraordinary in the Skeena, I can see with equally immediate recognition the tragically common—the markers along an arc that have led to similar outcomes all along the western edge of the continent. 

But several important variables challenge the relevance of such comparisons. First, the suite of imminent threats to the Skeena’s integrity is arriving at the same time as the unequivocal results of a century of experimentation on rivers like the Columbia: there is no apparent way to subordinate the integrity of the system and retain its resilience as reflected in complex, abundant, and dynamic natural and human communities. This understanding confers the opportunity to discuss choices in their proper historical and bioregional context. 

Second, the scale of the watershed is big enough to be internationally significant but small enough to accommodate direct discussions between stakeholders. 

Third, communities remain extremely connected to their surrounding environments and engaged in deliberations affecting their future. Responsibility has not been completely divested to institutions outside the watershed; people still look to each other to supply and share information. Resources, and their management, have not become placeless—and neither has advocacy on their behalf. All of this suggests a powerful potential for self-determinism that is preciously rare. 

Additionally, the significance of what is here ensures that conversations about the Skeena’s future will include supporting voices from well beyond its floodplain. The growing extent of Canadian and international interest in the Skeena is, in part, an expression of loss elsewhere. If _our nature_ literally means our basic or inherent features, our innate or essential qualities, it more generally means who we are and, by extension, what inspires and challenges and nurtures. And those of us who have elsewhere lost something of our nature are compelled to leverage relevant lessons in the Skeena, where there is still a chance to preserve natural abundance and the robust cultural and economic expression such wealth endows. By communicating the patterns of loss and its consequences, nonresidents can help ensure that everyone knows what we’ve got here, certainly before it’s gone but perhaps without it ever going at all.

At the same time, visitors cannot fully know how much else is stacked among the logs on freighters in the Rupert harbor, caught up in the fish they hook and fight on the Bulkley, represented by the artistic and ceremonial expression of First Nations. Our vignettes of experience only partially connect us to the depth of history and meaning inherent to a life lived here. But as different as they may be, the perspectives of Skeena residents and outsiders are not unavailable to each other’s understanding or mutually exclusive of consideration in policy decisions. It is a situation ripe for sharing, for a kind of conceptual gift exchange such that we might broaden and enrich the story we tell here. 

Central to realizing that opportunity is the importance of acknowledging how our understanding of the past and hopes for the future affect what we see and what we fight for. Our varied self-interests obscure important differences between what we want from the place and what it can provide. Lost in narrow battles over access to resources is the natural baseline: abundance is the default condition in the Skeena, not one teased out by increasingly complicated management regimes. Stripped of legacy allocations, existing claims, and future expectations is the watershed itself. Beginning there, with the voice of the Skeena as a biological system, might provide a basis for examining how modern communities and industries could organize themselves around that reality. Doing so would reveal stories that no longer fit our picture of the place, and need to be adjusted.

Those stories connect us to our ancestors, to each other, and to our environment; they define how we structure our communities and our work, which reciprocate by leaving their mark on us. Sometimes, these feedbacks are not as positive as we would hope, or, worse, they turn destructive. Loyalty to a story irrespective of how it fits into our understanding of the land and our relationships to it can have disastrous results. I live within such a commitment, unbroken despite 150 years of it steadily producing natural and cultural impoverishment from the wealth of the Columbia and the Snake. Diminishing abundance determines each new generation’s opportunities along my home rivers; these present opportunities become our memories of a collective past, and together they mark the boundaries of what we imagine it could be again. Short of a radical reversal, we will have few expectations for salmon in the Columbia beyond their mass production in facilities adjacent to the actual river.

But elsewhere and throughout the region, unlikely collaborations are telling different stories, insisting on renewal—of natural systems, of cultural potential, of legal and moral responsibility to indigenous peoples, and more. Examining formerly intractable problems, they are asking different questions, amending old stories, and reaching radically different conclusions with profoundly inspiring results. Hundreds of projects to remove dams and restore habitat while accommodating agricultural and power needs include historic agreements on rivers like the Elwha, the White Salmon, the San Joaquin, the Rogue, and the Klamath. With great difficulty, at great expense, often out of desperation, people are working to bring the wheel back around, to reclaim a place for our missing heritage in a more hopeful future.

On the Skeena, that future is now. Despite considerable effects from more than a century of the industrial economy’s insults to the environment and indigenous communities, much of the core of what we hope for is already here. This presents both opportunities and challenges. The Skeena’s relative abundance enables experimentation with ideas that might be ruled out in conditions of scarcity; it also masks the urgent need to develop policies, institutions, and economic and social structures that can evolve in response to the inevitable forces of change originating from within and beyond the watershed. This innovation will be not one big idea but many, a power distributed among individuals and groups suggesting, testing, modifying, and sharing. As in the case of salmon or any other example of successful diversification, many variations emerge from a few central themes, always adapting in response to feedback. There are, and must continue to be, innumerable voices expressing hope for this future and working toward its realization. In celebration of the ongoing conversation, here are a few of them. 

