---
published: true
layout: post
category: Essay
author: Jim Norton 
tags: ['story']
issue: Skeena
toc-img: epilogue.jpg
story-img: epilogue.jpg
story-img-caption: Ship off the BC coast, by Neil Ever Osborne.
---
At a recent conference in Smithers, people gathered from throughout the watershed and the region to discuss various issues related to salmon and steelhead habitat in the Skeena. Speakers from government, advocacy, First Nations, and scientific communities shared elements of their experience with subjects as diverse as salmon life history, constitutional case law, and the effects of climate change on water flows. Visuals included a chart titled “Defining Salmon Biodiversity” showing thirty-two ecotypic zones with distinct borders and coloration, hosting special populations of “conservation units.” And one participant walked us through a new ecosystem-based management handbook, a detailed template for conservation inspired by recent success in securing protections for the Great Bear Rainforest. 

Each presentation distilled specific expertise and expressed a commitment to applying it on behalf of salmon. Collectively, the information reflected our considerable interest in the Skeena and the sophistication of the tools and process by which we seek to understand it.

The breadth and depth of existing knowledge about salmon is impressive. The extent of ongoing research and inquiry is encouraging. We have learned a lot about the fish themselves—their life cycles and life histories, who they are and what they do and what they need and where they go. And we have a seemingly ever-increasing appreciation for their extraordinary diversity, how they have evolved to express many different traits and behaviors, and how these physical and behavioral characteristics are manifestations of the diverse aquatic and terrestrial environments with which they interact. As examples of ecological reciprocity, salmon have no equal; they are a part of the Skeena, and the Skeena is a part of them.

In addition to the data itself, research has given us new methodologies and technologies with which to monitor conditions, observe juvenile out-migrations, estimate adult returns, and enumerate many different elements of our environment. The capacity to examine these local variables is helping us consider not only the nature and intensity of changes to conditions in the Skeena but also their connection to significant climate-related effects and other extraregional and global phenomena. Not surprisingly, organizing the vast quantities of data collected by limnologists, biologists, hydrologists, climatologists, ecologists, and countless other specialists is proving as complicated as the environment itself. 
 
The panoply of advocacy groups, government agencies, and multilateral agreements, within the watershed and beyond, interprets this information and works to translate numbers into meaning. Whether used to justify new harvest regimes or to propose expanded habitat protections, statistical fragments become purposeful narratives. The empirical converted to the notional. The Departments, Ministries, Coalitions, Forums, Treaties, Agreements, Policies, Working Groups, Unions, Committees, Foundations, Initiatives, and Campaigns are a form of kinship, our contemporary clans. Without question, this is a powerful distribution of engagement—concentric communities of people with common goals, empowered with information and the opportunity to share it.

But by the afternoon of the Smithers conference’s second day, my admiration mixed with something else. I groped for definition; _concern, fatigue, anxiety_ all failed as appropriate appellations for a vague sense of dislocation. As the succession of PowerPoints, graphs, and charts coalesced into a body of work representing years of committed research, data collection, and analysis, I felt specifically enlightened but broadly overwhelmed. Each presentation was a kind of short story, discrete and comprehensible; bound together, they were an anthology of the ambiguous and perplexing. 

The more I heard about salmon and their habitats, the more it all suggested that a proper validation of our understanding required acknowledging the limits of our understanding. “Salmon” consistently defy characterization as an entity and instead affirm themselves a network of relationships of previously unimaginable complexity and depth. We resolve the pictures in our study pieces only to find they form a puzzle without edges. 

Extrapolating meaningful trends from our data is particularly difficult in the context of a resource whose natural baseline is startling year-to-year variability, and we can have little confidence that the time frames or area proportions at which we examine the system reflect those on which it is operating. And so I walked out of the Hudson Bay Lodge feeling that hidden somewhere in the space between these scales of perspective resides the central challenge of our time: how to simultaneously express the wisdom _and_ humility required for cultivating an enduring prosperity within the inherent richness of our world. 


Though people disagree profoundly about the causes of recent declines in various salmon runs, we share an angst over their effects. Fights over allocation, chronically dysfunctional government institutions, wildly differing interpretations of collections of statistics, and the attenuation of indigenous cultural narratives are responses to scarcity, expressions of a loss of control, and the antithesis of the aboriginal gift-giving culture that dominated for millennia and that derived from rituals of abundance. Desperate, we continue to search for solutions.

For over a century, on systems throughout western North America, we have applied our increasingly sophisticated understanding of ecological health and salmon life history to the problem of their decline Along the Columbia and countless other formerly abundant wild salmon streams, we have rationalized the enigmatic, partitioned the indivisible, and simplified the complex. Confidence in our understanding of parts has become a conceit that we can optimize the whole.

But the uncomfortable reality of managing a resource as dynamic as salmon is that there are probably no static regulatory structures appropriate from one year to the next, much less one decade to the next. Compared to the wildly conditional nature of a system in a state of continuous evolution, fixed management programs quickly ossify. Like a wiggling subject under a microscope, salmon systems move quickly out of the narrow, defined boundaries of our lenses. Our science, our policies, our economies, our communities, our hopes, and our expectations apply overlapping filters, each attempting to view a part of the system from a certain angle but collectively obscuring the true nature of the subject. 

Furthermore, the amount of information to gather, assimilate, and integrate into policy is growing exponentially, whether because of our ability to imagine new areas of study, our ability to measure variables, the interconnectedness of variables that are increasingly transregional or global in scope, or all of the above. At the same time that we are designing management regimes dependent on such specialized research, governments continue to downsize personnel and budgets necessary for collecting and evaluating the information. 

Despite these limitations, our economic systems continue to demand predictable regulatory structures from our governments, our governments need the data on which to base their estimations, and research looks for a biological consistency found only in the salmon’s certain indifference to it all. 

This approach conflicts with the protean reality of salmon populations and has disappointed our hopes for their sustained, abundant harvest. In ever more urgent and expensive efforts to control salmon systems, we have restricted the very diversity of life histories that are the heart of their transformative abundance. The graveyard of policies that sought to reduce natural resource management to math problems holds more than a century of catastrophic failures—from maximum sustainable yield (MSY) to catch per unit effort (CPUE) to individually transferable quotas (ITQs) to Uncle Sam’s Fish College and the hatchery system in the United States.

These models originated in snapshots of data representing highly variable interactions between innumerable contingencies over arbitrary time frames. They were ambitious proposals to manage an unpredictable future by basing policies on a fixed interpretation of a continually changing reality. They didn’t work.

Ironically, a frequent response to natural resource decline is to cling more tightly to the agents of that decline. Even as they break, our technoindustrial creations and management structures become more rigid, like a splinted wound. We guard them as precious and grant them more autonomy in an increasingly circumscribed system, resulting in a narrowing of options for fish and for people. Expectations are passed on intact, but the underlying reality might have dramatically changed in a way not immediately apparent or acceptable to stakeholders. In this disconnect is the source of so much of our history of conflict about salmon.

In the Skeena, there remains an extraordinary opportunity to choose something different. The willingness of stakeholders within the watershed to combine science with stories, linear assessments with nonlinear knowledge, the quantitative with the qualitative, the analytical with the intuitive, and the extraregional with the indigenous will have much to say about whether the application of the wisdom on display at the Smithers conference is flexible and adaptable enough to be relevant as we move forward. 

Although perhaps less tangible, these more expansive frames confer a respect for the integrity of the whole. How do we reconcile the sense that we need radical change with the instinct to act incrementally, to leave options open? How do we make sure that we place the risks of management policies on our social and economic institutions rather than transferring them to the habitat? What are the consequences of failing? If a new regulatory structure doesn’t work, and the environment itself suffers, the intensity and permanence of impacts might eliminate possible alternatives. How do we preserve the full range of opportunities, the freedom to imagine how we might choose to interact with our land in subsequent generations? How do we make sure to capture what is good in holistic intent about “integrated planning,” “ecosystem-based management,” “egg to egg planning,” “watershed governance,” and “collaborative monitoring” without actually becoming more ambitiously reductivist and losing connection to the enigmatic whole?

One way is to design our regulatory structures to be responsive and flexible while applying the best available science with humility and caution. In doing so, it is important to recognize that knowledge fragments are how we understand portions of the world, but they are not how it functions in its entirety and still less how it should be managed. No matter how well understood a given diagnosis, prescriptions derived from it are bound to fail unless they take into account the full range of dynamic and unpredictable conditions we struggle to understand and predict. 

An example from the Smithers conference of how our scientific understanding might affirm the need for humility, caution, and adaptability in our decisions was Jack Stanford and Jeff Anderson’s discussion of global warming trends on autumn low flows in the Skeena. Stanford and Anderson stated without equivocation that climate will become—_is already_—a huge factor, catalyzing feedback loops that we are only just beginning to imagine, much less understand. As minimum temperatures increase much faster in winter than in the rest of the year, the accelerating effects of changes to ice and snow cover, hydrology, vegetation, and insects will manifest in unpredictable ways. The mechanisms of change are not regional or hemispheric but global, operating on amorphous, ominous-sounding cycles—Pacific Decadal Oscillations and El Niño Southern Oscillations—as perplexing as they are significant. Relative to the magnitude of these influences, the Skeena simply isn’t big enough to self-buffer. Stanford and Anderson succinctly but pointedly summarized the implications of the uncertain nature of inevitable transformation on management policy: “We absolutely must be as charitable as possible.”

Another way to resist the telescoping of our view of the Skeena is to keep in mind that even as—_especially because_—we have ever more capacity to examine things up close, we should work to make sure our lens doesn’t become exclusively small.

There are many expressions of what we know about the Skeena other than what can be plotted, shaded, and correlated, including things we can’t measure. This information has been part of First Nations communities for millennia. Comprised of replicated observations over many generations of time, these knowledge systems are not only inherently scientific; they also represent our only connection to the deep time on which most ecological systems operate. 

Equally meaningful, they also encompass the culture of respect that evolved among people as a function of profoundly intimate experience with the environment around them. This was not just a form of ritual, it was an application of effective governance. Information is shared as a narrative covering many aspects of life in the watershed, not exclusively packaged as discrete data sets. We can promote and maintain this paradigm, where the results of formal research are incorporated into a broader sense of place that includes indigenous understanding and oral histories.

Accepting that the Skeena has a purpose beyond our expectations, and a complexity well beyond our convenient simplifications, we can remain conscious and celebratory and accommodating of the mysterious unfolding of life within its watershed.

The language of this accommodation is a language of magic, poetry to accompany our prose. Along with “assess,” “design,” “implement,” “monitor,” and “revise,” we need to feel, gape, wonder, exalt, and be mystified. In addition to polygons and bubble diagrams, there will be ceremony and art; in addition to units and pieces and bar graphs, there will be ongoing celebration of the continuum found only in clear streams of fresh meltwater shaded by moss-covered spruce trees. In addition to advocacy handbooks, there will be the organic, personal, and messy collaboration of people listening, talking, proposing, rejecting, accepting, creating, and working toward a vision for a shared future specific to the changing conditions in their common home.

The voice of the Skeena will be fully expressed only through evolutionary significant units _and_ salmon kings, in conference rooms _and_ around campfires. It will be expressed in the Tyee test fishery, at Kitwanga and Babine counting fences, and in ancient songs reminding us simply that our boxes are full. Empirical understanding will be tantamount to emotive celebration—of the glorious riot of life in the Skeena that needs nothing, wants nothing, other than to be free.
